# Traveling-salesman-problem-with-stars-java
The third project of my algorithms class, reading in all stars within 10 parsecs of earth and, and using them as an instance of the traveling salesman problem.
You can read read the full problem statement in “CSCI-3412-Program-4.pdf” and my report of the results in “HW4.pdf”. The following is adapted from “HW4.pdf”.
## Problem
Given a list of all stars within 10 parsecs of our sun (herby called Sol) find a path of low distance to visit all of them. The solution must be some type of greedy algorithm as this problem (The Traveling Salesman Problem) has no known solution that can be run in a reasonable time.
## Design
The suggested heuristic was to, at each step, go to the nearest unvisited star. This can be implemented in O(n^2). Notably though this is not the case for the above dataset it has been proven that this method can result in worst possible distance (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166218X01001950).
My implementation was in java and relies on, an adt called Star, and the internal functions of java. In java I found it easiest to simply read in the csv line by line int a string. I split that string along the ‘,’ characters and convert the needed numbers into doubles. My Star adt has 6 data members. 2 strings for name and number of the star and 4 doubles for distance and xyz location. There are 2 appropriate constructors and a function for calculating new distances at each step. Each line in the csv is read into a new Star. In java many data structures are put in the general category of “Collections” this includes the ArrayList class. All Collections have an internal function called a “Comparator” which returns 1, 0, or -1 for a given comparison of 2 objects. For any “Collection” the internal sort function relies on this “Comparator”. I overload this class and function to make use of the internal sort for an ArrayList of Star objects by distance. With the above functionality built my main places all stars in an ArrayList called baseStars. At each step the top star on the sorted list is placed in a pointer called CWS (currently working star) and the previous CWS is placed on a queue. Then each star’s distance from CWS is calculated and the list is resorted. Following the termination of the main loop I then output the contents of the queue summing he recorded distances.
All 327 stars are traveled too in 554.9656377679933 parsecs. This is surprisingly good for such a simple heuristic however better heuristics for the problem are known to exist and it is an active area of research. I would not be surprised if there is a great deal more optimization to be done.
